SOURCE: WHO Model Formulary 2008 (companion to the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines)
TITLE: Gentamicin
URL: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241547659
LICENSE: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo/)
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-11


Gentamicin

Injection: 10 mg; 40 mg (as sulfate)/ml in 2-ml vial.

Aminoglycosides including gentamicin are bactericidal and active against some Gram-

positive and many Gram-negative organisms including Pseudomonas aeruginosa .

Aminoglycosides are not absorbed from the gut and must therefore be given by

injection for systemic infections. Excretion is mainly by the kidney and accumulation

occurs in renal impairment.

Gentamicin should only be prescribed and administered by trained health personnel.

Care must be taken to ensure correct dosage and duration of treatment are not

exceeded, because most adverse effects are dose related. The most important adverse

effects are ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity and they are most common in the elderly and

in patients with renal impairment. These groups and, if possible, all patients should be

monitored for ototoxicity by audiometry. If there is impairment of renal function, the

dose interval must be increased; in severe renal impairment, the dose should also be

reduced. Serum concentration monitoring avoids both excessive and subtherapeutic

concentrations and can prevent toxicity and ensure efficacy. If possible serum

concentrations should be monitored in all patients, but

must  be measured in infants,

the elderly, in obesity, in cystic fibrosis, in high-dosage regimens, in renal impairment,

or if treatment lasts for longer than 7 days.

Loading and maintenance doses of gentamicin are based on the patient’s weight and

renal function (for example, using a nomogram) with adjustments based on plasma

gentamicin concentration. High doses are used occasionally for serious infections.

Gentamicin is a representative aminoglycoside antibiotic. Various medicines can serve

as alternatives.

Uses:  pneumonia; cholecystitis; peritonitis; septicaemia; acute pyelonephritis;

prostatitis; otitis externa; skin and soft tissue infections; pelvic inflammatory

disease (with clindamycin); endocarditis; meningitis; listeriosis; tularaemia;

brucellosis; plague; surgical prophylaxis; eye infections (section 21.1).

Contraindications:  myasthenia gravis.

Precautions:  renal impairment (reduce dose; Appendix 4); neonates, infants,

and the elderly (adjust dosage and monitor renal, auditory, and vestibular

function, and serum gentamicin concentrations); avoid prolonged use;

conditions characterized by muscular weakness; obesity (use ideal body

weight to calculate dose and monitor serum gentamicin concentration

closely); pregnancy (Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3);

interactions : Appendix 1.

Dose:

Infections due to susceptible organisms, by  intramuscular injection or by  slow

intravenous injection  (over at least 3 minutes) or by intravenous infusion , ADULT,

3–5 mg/kg daily in divided doses every 8 hours; NEONATE  up to 2 weeks,

3 mg/kg every 12 hours; CHILD  2 weeks–12 years, 2 mg/kg every 8 hours.

Pelvic inflammatory disease (with clindamycin), by intravenous injection , ADULT,

1.5 mg/kg every 8 hours.

Endocarditis (as part of combination therapy),  by intramuscular injection  or by

intravenous injection  (over at least 3 minutes), ADULT, 1 mg/kg every 8 hours.

Surgical prophylaxis (with clindamycin), by intravenous injection , ADULT, 5 mg/kg

as a single dose at induction.

NOTE.  One hour (peak) concentrations should not exceed 5–10 mg/litre

(3–5 mg/litre for endocarditis); pre-dose (trough) concentration should be less than

2 mg/litre (less than 1 mg/litre in endocarditis).

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions.

Adverse effects:  vestibular and auditory damage, nephrotoxicity; rarely,

hypomagnesaemia on prolonged therapy; antibiotic-associated colitis,

stomatitis; also nausea, vomiting, rash, and blood disorders.
