SOURCE: WHO Model Formulary 2008 (companion to the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines)
TITLE: Insulin (medication)
URL: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241547659
LICENSE: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo/)
RETRIEVED: 2026-08-14


18.5 Insulins and other antidiabetic agents

Diabetes mellitus is characterized by hyperglycaemia and disturbances of

carbohydrate, fat, and protein metabolism. There are two principal types of

diabetes.

Type 1 diabetes or insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus is due to a deficiency of

insulin caused by autoimmune destruction of pancreatic beta cells. Patients

require administration of insulin.

Type 2 diabetes or non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus is due to reduced

secretion of insulin  from the pancreas or to peripheral resistance to the action

of insulin. Type 2 diabetes may be controlled by diet alone, but often those

with this form of the disease require administration of oral antidiabetic drugs

or insulin. The energy and carbohydrate intake must be adequate but obesity

should be avoided. In type 2 diabetes, obesity is one of the factors associated

with insulin resistance. Diets high in complex carbohydrate and fibre and low

in fat are beneficial. Emphasis should be placed on exercise and increased

activity.

The aim of treatment is to achieve the best possible control of blood glucose

concentration and prevent or minimize complications including microvascular

complications such as retinopathy, albuminuria, and neuropathy. Diabetes

mellitus is a strong risk factor for cardiovascular disease; other risk factors for

cardiovascular disease, such as smoking, hypertension, obesity and

hyperlipidaemia, should also be addressed.

Insulin

Appropriate insulin regimens should be worked out for each patient. Insulin

requirements may be affected by variations in lifestyle (diet and exercise).

Concomitant use of drugs such as corticosteroids, presence of infections,

stress, accidental or surgical trauma, puberty and pregnancy (second and third

trimesters) tend to increase insulin requirements; renal or hepatic impairment

and some endocrine disorders (for example, Addison disease and

hypopituitarism) or coeliac disease, usually reduce requirements. In pregnancy,

insulin requirements should be monitored frequently.

Insulin must be given by injection because it is inactivated by gastrointestinal

enzymes. Generally, insulin is given by subcutaneous injection into the upper

arms, thighs, buttocks, or abdomen. There may be increased absorption from a

limb site, if the limb is used in strenuous exercise following the injection. It is

essential to use only syringes calibrated for the particular concentration of

insulin administered.

Insulin preparations can be classified according to duration of action after

subcutaneous injection as follows:

- those of short duration which have a relatively rapid onset of action, for

example, soluble or neutral insulin;

- those with an intermediate action, for example, isophane insulin;

- those with a relatively slow onset and long duration of action, for example

protamine zinc insulin.

Soluble insulin , when injected subcutaneously, has a rapid onset of action

(after 30–60 minutes), a peak action between 2 and 4 hours, and a duration of

action of up to 8 hours. Soluble insulin by the intravenous route is reserved for

urgent treatment and fine control in serious illness and perioperatively. When

injected intravenously, soluble insulin has a very short half-life of only about

5 minutes and its effect disappears within 30 minutes.

When injected subcutaneously, intermediate-acting insulins  take effect within

approximately 1–2 hours, within a maximal effect at 4–12 hours and a duration

of action of 16–24 hours. They can be given twice daily (together with short-

acting insulin) or once daily, particularly in elderly patients. Most can be mixed

with soluble insulin in the syringe, administered together while retaining the

properties of each component.

Long-acting insulins [not included on the 15th WHO Model List] have an

onset of action approximately 4 hours after subcutaneous injection; peak

activity is between 10 and 20 hours, and duration of action is up to 36 hours.

Mixed insulin zinc suspension can be classified as either intermediate or long-

acting.

The duration of action of different insulin preparations varies considerably

from one patient to another and this needs to be assessed for every individual.

The type of insulin used, and also its dose and frequency of administration,

depend on the precise requirements of each patient. For patients with acute

onset diabetes mellitus, treatment should be started with soluble insulin given

3 times daily with medium-acting insulin at bedtime. For those less seriously ill,

treatment is usually started with a mixture of pre-mixed short- and medium-

acting insulins (for example, 30% soluble insulin and 70% isophane insulin)

given twice daily. The proportions of soluble insulin can be increased in

patients with excessive post-prandial hyperglycaemia.

Regimens should be developed by each country.

Monitoring

If possible, patients should monitor their own blood glucose concentration

using blood glucose strips. Blood glucose concentration varies throughout the

day; diabetics should aim to maintain their blood glucose concentration

between 4 and 9 mmol/litre for most of the time (ideally, 4–7 mmol/litre

before meals and less than 9 mmol/litre after meals) while accepting that on

occasions it will be higher; strenuous efforts should be made to prevent blood-

glucose concentration falling below 4 mmol/litre because of the risk of

hypoglycaemia. Patients should be advised on how to look for troughs and

peaks in their own blood glucose and to adjust their insulin dosage accordingly,

but preferably only once or twice a week. Insulin doses are determined on an

individual basis, by gradually increasing the dose to optimize blood glucose

concentration while avoiding hypoglycaemia.

In the absence of blood glucose monitoring strips, urine glucose monitoring

strips can be used; in fact this is the method of personal choice for many

patients with Type 2 diabetes mellitus. It is less reliable than blood glucose but

is easier and costs much less. All patients should monitor either blood or urine

glucose concentration daily.

Hypoglycaemia

Hypoglycaemia is a potential complication in all patients treated with insulin or

less frequently with sulfonylureas. The consequences of hypoglycaemia include

confusion, seizures, coma, and cerebral infarction.

Loss of warning of hypoglycaemia is common among insulin-treated patients

and can be a serious hazard, especially for drivers and those in dangerous

occupations. It is vital that patients maintain a very tight control on their blood

glucose in order to manage their condition; not only does tight control lower

the blood glucose concentration needed to trigger hypoglycaemic symptoms;

but any increase in the frequency of hypoglycaemic episodes reduces the

warning symptoms experienced by patients. Beta-blockers can also blunt

hypoglycaemic awareness (and delay recovery). Some patients report loss of

hypoglycaemic warning after transfer to human insulin. Although clinical

studies do not confirm that human insulin decreases hypoglycaemic awareness,

if a patient believes that human insulin is responsible for loss of warning, it is

reasonable to revert to animal insulin. To restore warning signs, episodes of

hypoglycaemia must be reduced to a minimum; this involves appropriate

adjustment of insulin dose and frequency, and careful attention to the timing

and quantity of meals and snacks.

For sporadic physical activity, extra carbohydrate may need to be taken to

avert hypoglycaemia. Blood glucose should be monitored before, during, and

after exercise.

Initial treatment of “mild to moderate” hypoglycaemia involves glucose, 10–

20 g, given by mouth either in liquid form or as granulated sugar (2 teaspoons)

or sugar lumps (3 lumps). If necessary, this may be repeated after 10–15

minutes.

Hypoglycaemia which causes unconsciousness is medical emergency.

Glucagon [not included on the 15th WHO Model List], a polypeptide

hormone produced by the alpha cells of the islets of Langerhans, increases

plasma glucose concentration by mobilizing glycogen stored in the liver. In

severe hypoglycaemia, if sugar cannot be given by mouth, glucagon can be

given by injection. Carbohydrates should be given as soon as possible to

restore liver glycogen. If injection of glucagon is not effective in 10 minutes,

intravenous glucose should be given. Note that glucagon is not appropriate for

the treatment of chronic hypoglycaemia.

Alternatively, 50 ml of glucose solution, 20% [not included on the 15th WHO

Model List] may be given intravenously into a large vein through a large gauge

needle; care is required since at this concentration glucose solution is irritant,

especially if extravasation occurs. Alternatively, 25 ml of glucose solution, 50%

(section 26.2) may be given, but this higher concentration solution is even

more irritant and viscous, which makes administration difficult. Glucose

solution, 10% (section 26.2) may also be used but a larger volume is needed. In

the case of hypoglycaemia caused by an overdose with a long-acting insulin,

close monitoring is necessary because further administration may be required.

Patients whose hypoglycaemia is caused by a sulfonylurea should be

transferred to hospital because the hypoglycaemic effects of these drugs may

persist for many hours.

Driving

Drivers need to be particularly careful to avoid hypoglycaemia. Insulin-

dependent diabetics should normally check their blood glucose concentration

before driving and, on long journeys, at intervals of approximately two hours;

they should ensure that a supply of sugar is always readily available and avoid

driving if their meal has been delayed. If hypoglycaemia occurs or warning

signs appear, the driver should stop the vehicle in a safe place, ingest a suitable

sugar supply and wait until recovery is complete (may be 15 minutes or longer).

Driving is particularly hazardous when hypoglycaemic awareness is impaired.

Diabetic ketoacidosis

Diabetic ketoacidosis is a potentially lethal condition caused by an absolute or

relative lack of insulin; it commonly occurs when adjustments to insulin dosage

fail to compensate for increases in insulin requirements, for example, during

severe infection or a major intercurrent illness. Diabetics ketoacidosis occurs

mostly in patients with Type 1 diabetes mellitus. It also occurs in Type 2

diabetics who have a temporary need for insulin. Diabetic ketoacidosis is

characterized by hyperglycaemia, hyperketonaemia, and acidaemia, leading to

dehydration and electrolyte disturbances. It is essential that soluble insulin and

intravenous fluids are readily available for the treatment of this condition.

Infections

Infections are more likely to develop in patients with poorly controlled

diabetes mellitus. These should be treated promptly and effectively to avoid

diabetic ketoacidosis.

Surgery

Particular attention should be paid to insulin requirements when a patient with

diabetes undergoes surgery, especially when surgery is likely to need an

intravenous infusion of insulin for longer than 12 hours. Soluble insulin should

be given in an intravenous infusion of glucose and potassium chloride

(provided the patient is not hyperkalaemic), and the amount adjusted to

provide a blood glucose concentration of between 7 and 12 mmol/litre. The

duration of action of intravenous insulin is only a few minutes, and therefore

the infusion must not be stopped unless the patient becomes severely

hypoglycaemic. In non-insulin dependent diabetics, insulin treatment is also

almost always required during surgery (oral hypoglycaemic drugs having been

omitted).

Insulin injection (soluble)

Injection: 40 IU/ml in 10-ml vial; 100 IU/ml in 10-ml vial.

Uses: diabetes mellitus; diabetic emergencies and during surgery; diabetic

ketoacidosis or coma.

Precautions: see note above; renal impairment (reduce dose; Appendix 4);

pregnancy (Appendix 2); and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions:

Appendix 1.

Dose:

Diabetes mellitus, by subcutaneous injection , by intramuscular injection , by intravenous

injection  or by intravenous infusion , ADULT  and CHILD, according to individual

requirements (see also introductory notes above).

Adverse effects:  transient oedema; hypoglycaemia in overdose; rarely

hypersensitivity reactions including urticaria and rash; local reactions and

lipoatrophy at injection site.

Intermediate-acting insulin

Injection: 40 IU/ml in 10-ml vial; 100 IU/ml in 10-ml vial (as compound

insulin zinc suspension or isophane insulin).

Uses: diabetes mellitus.

Contraindications:  intravenous administration.

Precautions:  see note above; renal impairment (reduce dose; Appendix 4);

pregnancy  (Appendix 2); and breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions:

Appendix 1.

Dose:

Diabetes mellitus, by subcutaneous injection , ADULT  and CHILD, according to

individual requirements (see also introductory note above).

Adverse effects: hypoglycaemia in overdose; rarely hypersensitivity reactions,

including urticaria and rash; local reactions and lipoatrophy at injection site.
