SOURCE: WHO Model Formulary 2008 (companion to the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines)
TITLE: Furosemide
URL: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241547659
LICENSE: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo/)
RETRIEVED: 2026-08-14


Furosemide

Injection: 10 mg/ml in 2-ml ampoule.

Tablet: 40 mg.

Furosemide is a representative loop diuretic. Various medicines can serve as alternatives.

Uses:  oedema; oliguria due to renal failure; heart failure (section 12.4).

Contraindications:  renal failure with anuria; precomatose states associated with

liver cirrhosis.

Precautions: monitor electrolytes, particularly potassium and sodium;

hypotension; the elderly (reduce dose); pregnancy (Appendix 2); in oliguria,

correct hypovolaemia before administration; renal impairment (Appendix 4),

hepatic impairment (Appendix 5); prostatic enlargement; interactions:

Appendix 1.

Dose:

Oedema, by mouth , ADULT, initially 40 mg daily on rising; usual maintenance

dose, 20–40 mg daily; may be increased to 80 mg daily or more in resistant

oedema; CHILD, 1–3 mg/kg daily (maximum, 40 mg daily).

Acute pulmonary oedema, by slow intravenous injection , ADULT, 20–50 mg,

increased incrementally in 20-mg steps every 2 hours, if necessary; if the

effective single dose is more than 50 mg, consider using slow intravenous

infusion  at a rate not exceeding 4 mg/minute; CHILD, 0.5–1.5 mg/kg daily

(maximum, 20 mg daily)

Oliguria (glomerular filtration rate less than 20 ml/minute), by slow intravenous

infusion  at a rate not exceeding 4 mg/minute, ADULT, initially 250 mg over

1 hour; if urine output is not satisfactory during the hour after the first dose,

infuse 500 mg over 2 hours then, if there is no satisfactory response during

the hour after the second dose, infuse 1 g over 4 hours; if there is no

response after the third dose, dialysis is probably necessary; the effective

dose (up to 1 g) can be repeated every 24 hours.

NOTE. Dose to be diluted in a suitable amount of infusion fluid, according to the

hydration of the patient.

Adverse effects:  hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia, hyponatraemia,

hypochloraemic alkalosis (for symptoms of fluid and electrolyte imbalance,

see introductory notes), increased calcium excretion, hypovolaemia,

hyperglycaemia (but less often than with thiazide diuretics); temporary

increase in plasma cholesterol and triglyceride concentration; less

commonly hyperuricaemia and gout; rarely rash, photosensitivity, bone

marrow depression (withdraw treatment), pancreatitis (with large parenteral

doses), tinnitus and deafness (with rapid administration of large parenteral

doses and in renal impairment; deafness may be permanent if other ototoxic

drugs taken).
