SOURCE: WHO Model Formulary 2008 (companion to the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines)
TITLE: Doxycycline
URL: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241547659
LICENSE: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo/)
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-11


Doxycycline

Capsule or tablet: 100 mg (hydrochloride).

Doxycycline is a tetracycline and is a broad-spectrum antibiotic that is effective for

conditions caused by chlamydia, rickettsia, brucella, and the spirochaete, Borrelia

burgdorferi  (Lyme disease). It is the preferred tetracycline since it has a more favourable

pharmacokinetic profile than other tetracyclines, including tetracycline. It is deposited

in growing bone and teeth causing staining and occasionally dental hypoplasia. It should

not be given to children under 8 years or pregnant women; in some countries, use in

children under 12 years is contraindicated.

Uses:  supplement to quinine or artesunate treatment for multidrug-resistant

P. falciparum  malaria; short-term prophylaxis of multidrug-resistant

P. falciparum  malaria; see also notes above; bacterial infections

(section 6.2.2).

Contraindications: pregnancy (Appendix 2); children under 8 years; porphyria;

systemic lupus erythematosus.

Precautions:  avoid exposure to sunlight or sunlamps (photosensitivity

reported); renal impairment (Appendix 4); hepatic impairment (Appendix 5);

breastfeeding (Appendix 3); interactions: Appendix 1.

Dose:

Supplement to malaria treatment (see note above), by mouth , ADULT  and CHILD

over 8 years, 100 mg twice daily for 7–10 days.

Short-term prophylaxis of malaria, by mouth , ADULT, 100 mg daily for up to

8 weeks; CHILD  over 8 years, 1.5 mg/kg daily for up to 8 weeks; doxycycline

should be started on the day before exposure and continued for 4 weeks

after last risk of exposure.

PATIENT ADVICE. Capsules should be swallowed whole with plenty of fluid while

sitting or standing to prevent oesophageal irritation. May be given with food or milk to

counter gastric irritation.

Adverse effects: gastrointestinal disturbances; anorexia; flushing, tinnitus;

photosensitivity; hypersensitivity reactions (including rash, exfoliative

dermatitis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, urticaria, angioedema, anaphylaxis

and pericarditis); headache and visual disturbances; hepatotoxicity, blood

disorders, pancreatitis and antibiotic-associated colitis reported; staining of

growing teeth and occasional dental hypoplasia.
