SOURCE: WHO Model Formulary 2008 (companion to the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines)
TITLE: Ciprofloxacin
URL: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241547659
LICENSE: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo/)
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-11


Ciprofloxacin

Tablet: 250 mg (as hydrochloride).

Ciprofloxacin is active against both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. It is

particularly active against salmonella, shigella, campylobacter, neisseria, Bacillus anthracis,

and Pseudomonas ssp .. It is also active against chlamydia and some mycobacteria. Most

anaerobic organisms are, however, not susceptible. Ciprofloxacin is used with

doxycycline and metronidazole to treat pelvic inflammatory disease.

Ciprofloxacin is a representative quinolone antibacterial. Various medicines can serve as

alternatives.

Uses: gastroenteritis (including cholera, shigellosis, travellers’ diarrhoea,

campylobacter, and salmonella enteritis); typhoid; gonorrhoea; chancroid;

pelvic inflammatory disease (with doxycycline and metronidazole);

legionnaires’ disease; meningitis (including meningococcal meningitis

prophylaxis); respiratory tract infections (including pseudomonal infections

in cystic fibrosis, but not pneumococcal pneumonia); urinary tract

infections; bone and joint infections; septicaemia; anthrax; skin infections;

otitis externa; prophylaxis in surgery.

Contraindications: history of tendon disorders related to quinolone use (see

below).

Precautions:  history of epilepsy or conditions that predispose to seizures,

G6PD deficiency, myasthenia gravis (risk of exacerbation), pregnancy

(Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (Appendix 3), children or adolescents (see

below); avoid exposure to excessive sunlight (discontinue if photosensitivity

occurs); rarely tendon damage (see below); renal impairment (Appendix 4);

avoid excessive alkalinity of urine and ensure adequate fluid intake (risk of

crystalluria); interactions : Appendix 1.

USE IN CHILDREN. Ciprofloxacin causes arthropathy in the weight-bearing joints of

immature animals and is therefore generally not recommended for use in children and

growing adolescents. However, the significance of this effect in humans is uncertain

and in some specific circumstances, short-term use of ciprofloxacin in children may be

justified. For example, ciprofloxacin is used to treat pseudomonal infections in cystic

fibrosis (for children over 5 years), and for treatment and prophylaxis of inhalational

anthrax.

TENDON DAMAGE. Tendon damage (including rupture) has been reported rarely in

patients receiving quinolones. Tendon rupture may occur within 48 hours of starting

treatment. Health-care workers should be aware that:

- quinolones are contraindicated in patients with a history of tendon disorders related

to quinolone use;

- elderly patients are more prone to tendinitis;

- the risk of tendon rupture is increased by the concomitant use of corticosteroids;

- if tendinitis is suspected, the quinolone should be discontinued immediately.

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example, operating

machinery or driving.

Dose:

Infections due to susceptible organisms, by mouth , ADULT, 250–750 mg twice

daily.

Shigellosis,  by mouth, ADULT, 500 mg twice daily for 3 days.

Cholera, by mouth , ADULT, 1 g as a single dose.

Acute uncomplicated cystitis,  by mouth , ADULT, 100 mg twice daily for 3 days.

Gonorrhoea and gonococcal conjunctivitis, by mouth , ADULT, 500 mg as a

single dose.

Chancroid, by mouth , ADULT, 500 mg twice daily for 3 days.

Pelvic inflammatory disease, by mouth , ADULT, 500 mg twice daily.

Pseudomonal lower respiratory tract infection in cystic fibrosis, by mouth ,

ADULT, 750 mg twice daily; CHILD  5–17 years, (see also Precautions), up to

20 mg/kg twice daily (maximum, 1.5 g daily).

Surgical prophylaxis, by mouth , ADULT, 750 mg, 60–90 minutes before

procedure.

Prophylaxis of meningococcal meningitis, by mouth , ADULT, 500 mg as a single

dose.

Adverse effects: nausea, vomiting, dyspepsia, abdominal pain, flatulence,

diarrhoea (rarely antibiotic-associated colitis); pancreatitis, dysphagia, tremor,

hyperglycaemia, headache, dizziness, sleep disorders, rash (rarely erythema

multiforme (Stevens-Johnson syndrome) and toxic epidermal necrolysis),

pruritus; vasculitis, erythema nodosum, petechiae, haemorrhagic bullae; less

frequently anorexia and increased blood urea and creatinine; drowsiness,

restlessness, asthenia, depression, confusion, hallucinations, convulsions,

paraesthesia, hypoesthesia, movement disorders; photosensitivity,

hypersensitivity reactions (including fever, urticaria, angioedema, arthralgia,

myalgia, and anaphylaxis); blood disorders (including eosinophilia,

leukopenia, thrombocytopenia); disturbances in vision, taste, hearing, and

smell, tinnitus; tenosynovitis; tachycardia, hypotension, oedema, syncope,

hot flushes and sweating; also isolated reports of tendon inflammation and

damage (especially in the elderly and in those taking corticosteroids; see also

above), haemolytic anaemia, renal failure, interstitial nephritis, and hepatic

dysfunction (including hepatitis and cholestatic jaundice); discontinue if

psychiatric, neurological, or hypersensitivity reactions (including severe rash)

occur.
