SOURCE: WHO Model Formulary 2008 (companion to the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines)
TITLE: Nifedipine
URL: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241547659
LICENSE: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo/)
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-11


Nifedipine

Immediate release capsule: 10 mg.

Uses: uncomplicated premature labour between 24–33 weeks gestation.

Contraindications:  cardiogenic shock; advanced aortic stenosis; within

1 month of myocardial infarction; unstable or acute attacks of angina;

porphyria.

Precautions: stop if ischaemic pain occurs shortly after starting treatment;

poor cardiac reserve; heart failure or significantly impaired left ventricular

function; severe hypotension; hepatic impairment (reduce dose;

Appendix 5); diabetes mellitus; breastfeeding (Appendix 3); avoid grapefruit

juice (may affect nifedipine metabolism); interactions: Appendix 1.

Dose:

Premature labour, sublingually  (immediate-release capsules), ADULT, initially

10 mg every 15 minutes if necessary, up to a maximum of 40 mg in the first

hour, then 60–160 mg daily in 3–4 divided doses by mouth  (sustained-release

tablets), adjusted to uterine activity.

Adverse effects: headache, flushing, dizziness, lethargy; tachycardia,

palpitations; exaggerated fall in blood pressure and reflex tachycardia (may

lead to myocardial or cerebrovascular ischaemia); gravitational oedema; rash

(erythema multiforme reported), pruritus, urticaria; nausea, constipation or

diarrhoea; increased frequency of micturition; eye pain, visual disturbances;

gum hyperplasia; asthenia, paraesthesia, myalgia, tremor, gynaecomastia;

depression, telangiectasis, cholestasis, and jaundice reported.

SECTION 23:

Peritoneal dialysis solution

Solutions for peritoneal dialysis are preparations for intraperitoneal use which

contain electrolytes in a similar concentration to that found in plasma, and also

glucose or another suitable osmotic agent. Peritoneal dialysis solutions always

contain sodium, chloride, and hydrogen carbonate (or a precursor); they may

also contain calcium, magnesium, and rarely potassium.

In renal failure, haemodialysis is the preferred method to correct the

accumulation of toxins, electrolytes, and fluid. Peritoneal dialysis is less

efficient than haemodialysis, but it is preferred in children, diabetic patients,

and patients with unstable cardiovascular disease; it is also used in patients

who can manage their condition, or those who live far from a dialysis centre. It

is unsuitable for patients who have had significant abdominal surgery.

In peritoneal dialysis, the solution is infused into the peritoneal cavity, where

exchange of electrolytes takes place by diffusion and convection, and excess

fluid is removed by osmosis, using the peritoneal membrane as an osmotic

membrane. There are 2 forms of peritoneal dialysis:

- continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis  (CAPD), in which dialysis is performed manually

by the patient several times each day;

- automated peritoneal dialysis  (APD), in which dialysis is performed by machine

overnight.

The main complication of peritoneal dialysis is peritonitis, which often results

from poor exchange technique; infections of the catheter exit site may also

occur, again because of poor technique. With long-term dialysis progressive

structural changes to the peritoneal membrane occur, ultimately resulting in

dialysis failure.

Intraperitoneal dialysis solution (of appropriate composition)

Parenteral solution.

Intraperitoneal dialysis solution is a complementary list preparation.

Uses: to correct electrolyte imbalance and fluid overload, and to remove

metabolites, in renal failure.

Contraindications:  abdominal sepsis; previous abdominal surgery; severe

inflammatory bowel disease.

Precautions: care is required with technique to reduce risk of infection; warm

dialysis solution to body temperature before use; some drugs may be

removed by dialysis.

Dose:

Individualized according to clinical condition, and based on blood results.

Adverse effects: infection including peritonitis; hernia; haemoperitoneum;

hyperglycaemia, protein malnutrition; blocked catheter.

SECTION 24:

Psychotherapeutic medicines
