SOURCE: WHO Model Formulary 2008 (companion to the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines)
TITLE: Phenytoin
URL: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241547659
LICENSE: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo/)
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-11


Phenytoin

Capsule: 25 mg; 50 mg; 100 mg (sodium salt).

Injection: 50 mg/ml in 5-ml vial (sodium salt).

Oral liquid: 25–30 mg/5 ml.

Tablet: 25 mg; 50 mg; 100 mg (sodium salt).

Tablet (chewable): 50 mg.

NOTE. The presence of both the 25 mg/5 ml and the 30 mg/5 ml strengths of the

oral liquid on the same market should be avoided to prevent confusion in prescribing

and dispensing.

Uses: generalized tonic–clonic seizures; partial seizures; status epilepticus.

Contraindications:  porphyria; avoid parenteral use in sinus bradycardia, sino-

atrial block, second- and third-degree heart block, Stokes-Adams syndrome.

Precautions:  hepatic impairment (reduce dose; Appendix 5); pregnancy

(increased risk of birth defects and neonatal bleeding, see note above;

Appendix 2) and breastfeeding (see note above; Appendix 3); diabetes

mellitus; monitor blood counts; hypotension and heart failure (especially

with parenteral use); in case of intravenous administration, resuscitation

facilities must be available and the injection solution alkaline (irritant to

tissues); interactions : Appendix 1.

BLOOD OR SKIN DISORDERS. Patients or their carers should be told how to

recognize signs of blood or skin disorders and advised to seek immediate medical

attention if symptoms such as sore throat, rash, mouth ulcers, bruising, or bleeding

develop. Leukopenia which is severe, progressive or associated with clinical symptoms

requires withdrawal (if necessary under cover of a suitable alternative antiepileptic).

SKILLED TASKS. May impair ability to perform skilled tasks, for example, operating

machinery or driving; see also note above.

Dose:

Generalized tonic–clonic  seizures, partial seizures,  by mouth , ADULT, initially

3–4 mg/kg daily (as a single dose or in 2 divided doses), increased gradually

at intervals of 2 weeks as necessary (with plasma phenytoin concentration

monitoring); to a usual maintenance dose of 200–500 mg daily; CHILD,

initially 3–5 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses, increased gradually according to

clinical response and plasma phenytoin concentration, to a usual

maintenance dose of 4–8 mg/kg daily (maximum, 300 mg daily).

NOTE. Plasma concentration for optimum response 10–20 mg/litre

(40–80 micromol/litre).

PATIENT ADVICE. Preferably taken with or after food.

Status epilepticus,

by slow intravenous injection  or by intravenous infusion  (with blood pressure and

ECG monitoring), ADULT, 15 mg/kg at a rate of not more than

50 mg/minute, as a loading dose; maintenance doses of about 100 mg;

by mouth  or by slow intravenous injection  should be given thereafter at intervals

of 6–8 hours, with monitoring of plasma concentrations; rates and dose

reduced according to weight; CHILD, 15 mg/kg as a loading dose at rate of

1 mg/kg/minute (not exceeding 50 mg/minute); NEONATE,

15–20 mg/kg as a loading dose at rate of 1–3 mg/kg/minute.

DILUTION AND ADMINISTRATION. According to manufacturer’s directions.

Adverse effects: gastric intolerance, headache, sleeplessness, agitation (during

initial phase); sedation, confusion, blurred vision, ataxia, nystagmus,

diplopia, slurred speech, cerebellar-vestibular symptoms, behavioural

disorders, hallucinations, hyperglycaemia (may be signs of overdosage);

gingival hyperplasia, acne, coarse facies, hirsutism, fever, hepatitis,

neurological changes including peripheral neuropathy, choreiform

movements, impaired cognition, and increased seizure frequency;

osteomalacia, rickets (associated with reduced plasma calcium levels);

lymph-node enlargement; vertigo; rash (discontinue; if mild re-introduce

cautiously, but discontinue if recurrence); very rarely Stevens-Johnson

syndrome (erythema multiforme), systemic lupus erythematosus, and toxic

epidermal necrolysis; rarely blood disorders including megaloblastic anaemia

(may be treated with folic acid), leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and

agranulocytosis with or without bone marrow depression; with intravenous

administration, cardiovascular and central nervous system depression

(particularly if administered too rapidly) with arrhythmias, hypotension and

cardiovascular collapse, and alterations in respiratory function (including

respiratory collapse).
