SOURCE: Open RN Nursing Fundamentals, chapter 16 — Elimination
TITLE: Elimination
URL: https://wtcs.pressbooks.pub/nursingfundamentals/
LICENSE: CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-11


16.1 Elimination Introduction
Learning Objectives
Describe risk factors for urinary and bowel elimination
Identify cues related to alterations in elimination across the life span
Identify diagnostic tests indicative of disturbances in urinary and bowel elimination
Identify measures to promote urinary and bowel elimination
Contribute to a plan of care for clients with an alteration in urinary and bowel elimination
After ingesting food and fluids, our body eliminates waste products through the urinary system and the gastrointestinal system. Nurses provide care for clients with commonly occurring elimination alterations, including urinary tract infections, urinary incontinence, urinary retention, constipation, diarrhea, and bowel incontinence. This chapter will provide an overview of these alterations and the associated nursing care.

16.2 Basic Concepts
Let’s begin by reviewing the basic anatomy and physiology of the urinary and gastrointestinal systems.
Urinary System
The urinary system, also referred to as the renal system or urinary tract, consists of the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra. The purpose of the urinary system is to eliminate waste from the body, regulate blood volume and blood pressure, control levels of electrolytes and metabolites, and regulate blood pH. The kidneys filter blood in the nephrons and remove waste in the form of urine. Urine exits the kidney via the ureters and enters the urinary bladder, where it is stored until it is expelled by urination (also referred to as voiding). See Figure 16.1 for an image of the male urinary system. The female urinary system is similar except for a smaller urethra.
Figure 16.1 Male Urinary System
A healthy adult with normal kidney function produces 800-2,000 mL of urine per day, depending on fluid intake, as well as the amount of fluid lost through sweating and breathing. The bladder typically holds about 360-480 mL of urine. As the bladder fills, it sends signals to the brain that it is time to urinate. The urinary tract includes two sets of muscles that work together as a sphincter, closing off the urethra to keep urine in the bladder until the brain sends signals to urinate. Urination occurs when the brain sends signals to the wall of the bladder to contract and squeeze urine out of the bladder and through the urethra. Frequency of urination depends on how quickly the kidneys produce urine and how much urine a person’s bladder can comfortably hold.
Normal urine should be clear, pale to light yellow in color, and not foul-smelling. However, some foods or medications may change the smell or color of urine. For instance, phenazopyridine (Pyridium), a common medication prescribed to treat the pain, frequency, and burning associated with urinary tract infections, can cause urine to appear orange.
Nurses frequently monitor and document a client’s urine output as part of the overall plan of care. It can be collected by placing a collection hat in the client’s toilet and then measured in a graduated cylinder. If the client has an indwelling catheter, the urine is emptied every shift from the catheter bag and measured in a graduated cylinder. For infants and toddlers, the number of daily wet diapers provides a general measure of urine output. For more specific measurement of urine output during hospitalization, wet diapers are weighed.
Terms commonly used to document conditions related to the urinary tract are as follows:
Anuria: Absence of urine output, typically found during kidney failure, defined as less than 50 mL of urine over a 24-hour period.
Dysuria: Painful or difficult urination.
Frequency: The need to urinate several times during the day or at night (nocturia) in normal or less-than-normal volumes. It may be accompanied by a feeling of urgency.
Hematuria: Blood in the urine, either visualized or found during microscopic analysis.
Oliguria: Decreased urine output, defined as less than 500 mL of urine in adults in a 24-hour period. In hospitalized clients, oliguria is further defined as less than 0.5 mL of urine per kilogram per hour for adults and children or less than 1 mL of urine per kilogram per hour for infants. New oliguria should be reported to the health care provider because it can indicate dehydration, fluid retention, or decreasing kidney function.
Nocturia: The need to get up at night on a regular basis to urinate. Nocturia often causes sleep deprivation that affects a person’s quality of life.
Polyuria: Greater than 2.5 liters of urine output over 24 hours, also referred to as diuresis. Urine is typically clear with no color. New polyuria should be reported to the health care provider because it can be a sign of many medical conditions.
Pyuria: At least ten white blood cells in each cubic millimeter of urine in a urine sample, typically indicating infection. In severe infections, pus may be visible in the urine. See Figure 16.2 for an image of pyuria for a client with urosepsis.
Urgency: A sensation of an urgent need to void. Urgency can cause urge incontinence if the client is not able to reach the bathroom quickly.
Figure 16.2 Pyuria
Read more details about the renal system in the “Review of Basic Concepts” section in the “Cardiovascular and Renal System” chapter in Open RN Pharmacology, 2e.
Wisc-Online: View an activity reviewing the Vascular System of the Kidneys.
Gastrointestinal System
The gastrointestinal (GI) system includes the mouth, esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, and anus. See Figure 16.3 for an image of the gastrointestinal system. Ingested food and liquid are pushed through the GI tract by peristalsis, the involuntary contraction and relaxation of muscle creating wave-like movements of the intestines. The stomach mixes food and liquid with digestive enzymes and then empties into the small intestine. The muscles of the small intestine mix food with enzymes and bile from the pancreas, liver, and intestine and push the mixture forward for further digestion. Bacteria in the GI tract, called normal flora or microbiome, also assist with digestion. The walls of the small intestine absorb water and the digested nutrients into the bloodstream. As peristalsis continues, the waste products of the digestive process move into the large intestine. The large intestine absorbs water and changes the waste from liquid into stool. The rectum, at the lower end of the large intestine, stores stool until it is pushed out of the anus during a bowel movement.
Figure 16.3 Gastrointestinal System
This section will focus on common alterations in bowel elimination, including constipation, diarrhea, and bowel incontinence. These alterations are common symptoms of several diseases and conditions of the gastrointestinal system. Nurses provide care to help manage these alterations.
Terms related to alterations in bowel elimination include the following:
Black stools: Black-colored stools can be side effects of iron supplements or bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol).
Rectal bleeding: Rectal bleeding refers to bright red blood in the stools, also referred to as hematochezia. It is a sign of bleeding from the lower GI tract. Rectal bleeding can range in severity from minimal drops of blood on the toilet tissue caused by hemorrhoids to severe bleeding in large amounts that are life-threatening and require emergency care. New bleeding should always be reported to the health care provider.
Tarry stools: Stools that are black, sticky, and appear like tar are referred to as melena. Melena is typically caused by bleeding in the upper part of the gastrointestinal tract, such as the esophagus, stomach, or the first part of the small intestine, or due to the client swallowing blood. The blood appears darker and tarry-looking because it undergoes digestion on its way through the GI tract. Bleeding from the upper part of the GI tract can also range from mild to life-threatening, depending upon the cause, and should always be reported to the health care provider.
Review information about digestion in the “Nutrition” chapter or read more information about the “Gastrointestinal” system in Open RN Nursing Pharmacology, 2e.
Newborns and Infants
Meconium refers to the first bowel movement of a newborn that appears sticky and black to dark green in color. See Figure 16.4 for an image of meconium. The stool of a breastfed baby usually appears like a curdled yellow, while that of a formula-fed baby is pastier. Breastfed babies often have bowel movements after every feeding. Formula-fed babies tend to have fewer bowel movements.
Figure 16.4 Meconium
Toddlers
Toddlers usually begin the process of toilet training between two and three years old. Enuresis is the term used to describe incontinence when sleeping (i.e., bed-wetting). Enuresis in children is considered normal unless it continues past seven or eight years of age, when it should be addressed with a pediatrician. Toddlers often have undigested food in their bowel movements due to the intestinal system not fully digesting some foods, such as corn or grapes.
Children
School-aged children may be at risk for developing constipation due to delaying bowel movements during school times until they are in the privacy of their homes. The longer the stool sits in the colon, the more water is absorbed by the intestines, and the harder stool becomes to pass.
Adults
Adult females often develop urinary incontinence related to pregnancy and delivery, menopause, or vaginal hysterectomy. Adult males may have urgency and urinary retention with possible overflow urinary incontinence as their prostate enlarges. Adults over the age of 30 may develop nocturia.
Older Adults
Peristalsis typically slows as aging occurs. Older adults should be encouraged to increase fluids, fiber, and activity, as appropriate, to prevent constipation. If a client is not able to meet the goal of a bowel movement with soft, formed stools every three days, then a bowel management program should be initiated.
Now that we have reviewed the basic structure and function of the urinary and gastrointestinal systems, let’s review the common alterations of urinary tract infection, urinary incontinence, urinary retention, constipation, diarrhea, and bowel incontinence in the following sections.
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. (2020). The urinary tract & how it works. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/urologic-diseases/urinary-tract-how-it-works ↵
“Urinary_System_(Male).png” by BruceBlaus is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0 ↵
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. (2020). The urinary tract & how it works. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/urologic-diseases/urinary-tract-how-it-works ↵
National Institutes of Health. (2019). Pyridium. DailyMed. https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=165d01d4-a9f7-2293-e054-00144ff8d46c ↵
Maddukuri, G. (2021). Urinary frequency. Merck Manual Professional Version. https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/genitourinary-disorders/symptoms-of-genitourinary-disorders/urinary-frequency ↵
Berry, C. (2020). Oliguria. Merck Manual Professional Version. https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/critical-care-medicine/approach-to-the-critically-ill-patient/oliguria ↵
Leslie, S. W. (2024). Nocturia. StatPearls [Internet]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK518987/ ↵
Meconium_Diaper.jpg” by Azoreg is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 ↵
definition

16.9 Applying the Nursing Process
Now that we have discussed several alterations in elimination, let’s apply the nursing process to clients experiencing these conditions.
Assessment
Urinary Elimination Assessment
Assessment of the urinary system includes asking questions about voiding habits, frequency, and if there is difficult or painful urination. The bladder may be palpated above the symphysis pubis for distention. If the client has incontinence, the perineal area should be inspected for skin breakdown. If urinary retention is suspected, a post-void residual amount may be measured by using a bladder scanner or by straight urinary catheterization. For a summary of common signs and symptoms associated with alterations in urinary elimination, see the “Selected Defining Characteristics” listed in Table 16.9a under the “Diagnosis” subsection.
If a client has had an indwelling urinary catheter removed recently, specific assessments should be performed to monitor for urinary tract infection and other complications.
Read more about caring for clients with urinary catheters in the “Facilitation of Elimination” chapter in Open RN Nursing Skills, 2e.
Bowel Elimination Assessment
Subjective assessment of the bowel system includes asking about the client’s normal bowel pattern, the date of the last bowel movement, characteristics of the stool, and if any changes have occurred recently in stool characteristics or pattern. A normal pattern is typically one bowel movement every one to three days with stools having a soft or formed consistency. Refer to Figure 16.6 under the “Constipation” section regarding using the Bristol Stool Chart to evaluate stool consistency.
Based on the client’s answers, additional questions can be included, such as bowel routines/toileting, the amount of fiber and fluid in the daily diet, daily activity, and the use of opioid medications. Keep in mind that clients who have recently undergone diagnostic procedures that include barium contrast can have significant hardening of the stool if the barium is not expelled within a day or two of the procedure. Clients are typically prescribed a stimulant laxative (such as Milk of Magnesia) to promote barium expulsion after these types of procedures. Additionally, clients who have recently had abdominal surgical procedures under general anesthesia are at increased risk of paralytic ileus.
For a summary of common symptoms associated with alterations in urinary elimination, see the “Selected Defining Characteristics” listed in Table 16.9a under the “Diagnosis” subsection.
The abdomen should be inspected for distension, bulging, bruising, or pulsatile masses and then auscultated for bowel sounds, noting if they are present, hyperactive, or hypoactive in all four quadrants. If bowel sounds are absent or there are other signs of possible obstruction or paralytic ileus, the provider should be notified immediately. A light palpation of the abdomen is performed to determine if there are tender areas, abnormal masses, or a firmness in the left lower quadrant, indicating the presence of stool. If pulsatile masses, distension, rigidity, or other indication of suspected abdominal problems is noted on inspection, the abdomen should not be deeply palpated due to the risk of injury or complications with palpation.
During inpatient care, the client is often requested to call the nurse when a bowel movement has occurred so the stool characteristics can be assessed. Document the amount (small, medium, or large), consistency (soft, formed, or hard) and color (brown or other color). Alterations in these characteristics can be caused by several conditions, such as infection, parasites, inflammatory conditions of the intestines or gallbladder, or liver conditions.
Some clients have surgical diversions for diseases such as diverticulitis or cancer. Ostomies are surgical openings in the abdomen for the expulsion of stool into a bag-like appliance. An ileostomy is an opening created at the juncture of the small and large intestines, so the stool has a liquid consistency. A colostomy is placed farther along the large intestines, where more water has been absorbed, so the stool is more formed.
Read about expected and unexpected findings during an abdominal assessment in the “Abdominal Assessment” chapter in Open RN Nursing Skills, 2e.
Read about caring for clients with ostomies in the “Facilitation of Elimination” chapter in Open RN Nursing Skills, 2e.
Urinary Diagnostic Tests
There are several commonly ordered diagnostic tests for urinary conditions, such as a urine dip, urinalysis, urine culture, cystoscopy, and urodynamic flow studies.
Urine Dip
A urine dip test refers to a treated chemical strip (dipstick) being placed in a urine sample. Patches on the dipstick will change color to indicate the presence of substances such as white blood cells, protein, or glucose. See Figure 16.7 for an image of a urine dipstick test. Urine is collected for a urine dip test in a clean container. Using the “clean catch” technique, the skin surrounding the urethra should be cleaned with a special towelette before the urine is collected. Catching the urine “midstream” is the goal, so request the client to start urinating, stop, and then urinate into the container.
Figure 16.7 Urine Dipstick Test
Urinalysis
A urinalysis includes a physical, chemical, and microscopic examination of urine by a lab technician. It requires collection of a “clean catch” urine sample in a sterile container that is analyzed by a lab technician under a microscope. See Table 16.9a for a selected urinalysis findings and their clinical significance.
Table 16.9a Selected Urinalysis Findings and Their Clinical Significance
Component
Normal Findings
Abnormal Findings & Their Clinical Significance
Color
Yellow, light/pale to dark.
Amber: bile pigments.
Tea-colored: bile pigments or medication side effects.
Dark yellow: concentrated urine.
Green/blue: side effects of medication.
Orange: bile pigments or side effects of medications or food.
Pink/red: blood in urine, menstrual contamination, uric acid crystals, or side effects of medication or food.
Appearance
Clear, translucent.
Cloudy: bacteria, precipitation of cells, pus, or contamination.
Odor
None or typical urine odor.
Fruity/sweet: diabetic ketoacidosis.
Fecal smell: gastrointestinal/bladder fistula or fecal contamination.
Pungent: urinary tract infection.
Urine pH
>8: old specimens, vegetarian diet, or vomiting.
<4.5: cranberry juice, dehydration, diabetes mellitus, diabetic ketoacidosis, diarrhea, emphysema, high-protein diet, or medication side effects.
Red Blood Cells (RBCs)
0–5 RBCs per mL.
Greater than 5 RBCs/mL, or hematuria: renal stones, pyelonephritis, tumors, trauma, contamination with menstrual blood, or contamination post masturbation.
White Blood Cells (WBCs)
Greater than 5 WBCs/mL: urinary tract infection or inflammation.
Nitrites
Negative.
Positive: urinary tract infection. However, false-positive and false-negative results can occur.
Leukocyte Esterase
Negative.
Positive: inflammation of urinary tract, tuberculosis, bladder tumors, kidney stones, or fever. However, false-positive and false-negative results can occur.
Protein
<150 mg/day or <10 mg/dL.
>150 mg/day or >10 mg/dL: early renal disease, pyelonephritis, congestive heart failure, physiological conditions such as strenuous exercise, fever, or dehydration; false positive/negative results based on urine pH and concentration.
Glucose
Negative.
Positive: diabetes, Cushing syndrome, pregnancy; false-positive with ketone presence.
Ketones
Negative.
Positive: diabetic ketoacidosis, pregnancy, keto diet, starvation, or fever.
Bilirubin
Negative.
Positive: liver dysfunction, bile duct obstruction, hepatitis, or cirrhosis.
See Figure 16.8 for an image of white blood cells, referred to as pyuria, as seen on a urinalysis under a microscope. A urinalysis looks for evidence of infection, including elevated numbers of bacteria and white blood cells. A positive leukocyte esterase test or the presence of nitrite also supports the diagnosis of a UTI.
Figure 16.8 Urinalysis Demonstrating White Blood Cells
Urine Culture
A urine culture identifies the specific microbe causing a urinary tract infection. If this is the client’s first, uncomplicated UTI of the lower urinary tract, the provider often assumes it is caused by the most common microbe, E. coli, and treats it with antibiotics without performing a culture. However, cultures are typically performed for clients with recurring UTIs or hospitalized clients at risk for hospital-associated infections.
When interpreting urine culture results, the presence of a single type of bacteria growing at high colony counts is typically considered a positive urine culture. For clean catch samples that have been properly collected, cultures with greater than 100,000 colony forming units (CFU)/milliliter of one type of bacteria usually indicate infection.
If a culture is positive, susceptibility testing is performed to guide treatment. Although a variety of bacteria can cause UTIs, most are due to Escherichia coli (E. coli) bacteria that are common in the digestive tract and routinely found in stool. Other bacteria that commonly cause UTIs include Proteus, Klebsiella, Enterobacter, Staphylococcus, and Acinetobacter. Susceptibility testing determines which antibiotics will inhibit the growth of the specific bacteria causing the infection. It is important for nurses to review culture results to verify the antibiotic therapy being administered has been found to be effective against the type of bacteria discovered in the culture. If there is any concern about the susceptibility results and current antibiotic therapy, the health care provider should be notified.
A culture that is reported as “no growth in 24 or 48 hours” usually indicates that there is no infection. If a culture shows growth of several different types of bacteria, then it is likely due to contamination of the urine sample during collection. This is especially true in voided urine samples if the organisms present include Lactobacillus and/or other common nonpathogenic vaginal bacteria in women. The provider may request a repeat culture on a sample that is more carefully collected.
Cystoscopy
A cystoscopy is a procedure completed by a health care provider with a cystoscope, a small, thin tube with a camera on the end that is inserted into the urethra and into the bladder. See Figure 16.9 for an illustration of cystoscopy. Fluid is inserted to expand the bladder so the bladder walls can be visualized. Biopsy samples can be taken from abnormal tissue through the tube and then sent to a medical lab for analysis. The client will feel the need to urinate when the bladder is full, but the bladder must stay full until the procedure is completed. A slight pinch may be felt if a biopsy sample is obtained. After the procedure, the client should be encouraged to drink four to six glasses of water per day, as appropriate for their medical status. A small amount of blood may be present in the urine after the procedure, but if the bleeding continues after urinating three times, or if other signs of infection are present, the provider should be notified.
Figure 16.9 Cystoscopy
Urodynamic Flow Test
Urodynamic testing is any procedure that looks at how well the bladder, sphincters, and urethra are storing and releasing urine. Most urodynamic tests focus on the bladder’s ability to hold urine and empty steadily and completely. Urodynamic tests can also show whether the bladder is having involuntary contractions that cause urine leakage.
Bowel Diagnostic Tests
There are several common diagnostic tests related to bowel elimination, including stool-based tests, a colonoscopy, a barium enema, and an abdominal CT scan.
Stool-Based Tests
Stool samples can be tested for bacteria, viruses, parasites, cancer, or for occult blood (i.e., hidden blood). Follow specific instructions from the lab for collecting the sample.
The Guaiac-Based Fecal Occult Blood Test finds hidden blood in the stool. As a screening test for colon cancer, it is performed annually. Before the test, the client should avoid many foods, such as red meat, melons, beets, and grapefruit for three days. They should not take aspirin or NSAIDs for seven days prior to the test. Stool samples from three separate bowel movements are smeared onto small paper cards and then returned to the medical lab for testing. If the test is positive (i.e., hidden blood is found), a follow-up colonoscopy is scheduled. See Figure 16.10 for an image of a typical card used to collect the stool smear for the test after a special solution has been applied. The blue color indicates a positive result for occult blood.
Figure 16.10 Guaiac Test
The Stool DNA Test (also called Cologuard) looks for certain abnormal sections of DNA from cancer or polyp cells and also checks for occult blood. Specific collection kits, including a sample container, liquid preservative, and specific instructions are provided.
Colonoscopy
During a colonoscopy, an instrument called a colonoscope is used. The colonoscope has a tiny camera attached to a long, thin tube that is inserted into the anus to check the entire colon and rectum. See Figure 16.11 for an illustration of a colonoscopy. This procedure is used to screen clients for colon cancer. Screening is recommended to start at age 50 (or 45 for high-risk populations, including African Americans), and thereafter once every ten years or as prescribed by the provider. It is also used to evaluate the colon for inflamed tissue and abnormal growths or lesions. Before the procedure, the client must complete a bowel prep that typically consists of a clear liquid diet and laxatives the day before the procedure to clean out the intestine so that everything can be seen clearly. Each provider typically has their own specific set of bowel prep instructions. Medications such as aspirin or anticoagulants may be ordered to be withheld for several days before the test. Clients are generally NPO after a specific time the night before the test. During the procedure, the client receives sedative medication to stay relaxed. If a polyp is found, it can be removed during the procedure and sent for biopsy. Because air is inserted into the colon during procedure, the client may feel bloated or have abdominal cramps and should be encouraged to freely pass the gas. Because this is typically an outpatient procedure, the client is unable to drive after the test and requires transportation. Potential complications of the procedure are rare but include bleeding and perforation of the colon. The client should receive written instructions for when to contact the health care provider or emergency services if complications occur. ,
Figure 16.11 Colonoscopy
Barium Enema
A barium enema is a special X-ray of the large intestine, including the colon and rectum, that is performed before and after instillation of barium via an enema. This test may also be referred to as a “lower GI series.” It is an older diagnostic test that has been mostly replaced by the colonoscopy test. Prior to the procedure, the client completes a bowel preparation regimen to cleanse the colon, which typically includes a clear liquid diet for one to three days, followed by the administration of laxative medication and/or an enema. During the procedure, an X-ray is taken, and then an enema containing barium is administered. Additional X-rays are taken as the client changes position to get different views of the colon. See Figure 16.12 for an image of barium enema results. After the procedure, it is normal for the client to have white stools for a few days. The client should be encouraged to drink extra fluids, as appropriate, and a laxative may be prescribed to prevent hard stools that can cause constipation.
Figure 16.12 Barium Enema
Abdominal CT Scan
An abdominal CT scan is an imaging method that uses a series of X-rays to create cross-sectional pictures of the abdomen. Because of the series of X-rays, clients are exposed to more radiation than when receiving a traditional X-ray. They will lie on a narrow table that slides into the CT scanner where the machine’s X-ray beam rotates around them. A computer creates separate images, called slices, that can be viewed on a monitor or printed on film. Three-dimensional models of the area can be made by stacking the slices together. See Figure 16.13 for an image of a CT scan.
Figure 16.13 CT Scan
A special dye, called contrast, is administered to clients before some tests so that certain areas show up better on the X-rays. If contrast is used, the client may be required to be NPO for four to six hours before the test. Contrast can be administered orally, rectally, or intravenously.
Oral contrast has a chalky taste and will pass out of your body through the stools. Clients receiving IV contrast may feel a slight burning sensation, metallic taste in the mouth, or warm flushing of the body that resolves in a few seconds.
Before sending the client for a procedure using contrast, check for previous allergies to iodine or other contrast dyes. Some clients may be prescribed diphenhydramine or corticosteroids before receiving the contrast if they have had a previous allergic reaction. Verify their kidney functioning status by checking BUN, creatinine, and EGFR values because IV contrast can worsen kidney function. If kidney function labs are abnormal, the nurse should notify the provider prior to the administration of IV contrast. If the client is currently taking the antidiabetic medication metformin, there may be restrictions placed on the administration of metformin before or after the procedure. Jewelry should be removed before the procedure.
After the procedure, encourage clients who have received contrast to increase their fluid intake to help eliminate it from their body, as appropriate. If they received barium, their stools will be light in color, and post-procedural laxatives are typically prescribed to prevent the stool from hardening, which can cause an impaction or obstruction.
Diagnosis
There are several nursing diagnoses related to alterations in elimination. Refer to a nursing care planning resource for current NANDA-I nursing diagnoses and evidence-based interventions. See Table 16.9b for common NANDA-I diagnoses related to elimination.
Table 16.9b Common NANDA-I Nursing Diagnoses Related to Alterations in Elimination
NANDA-I Diagnosis
Definition
Selected Defining Characteristics
Constipation
Decrease in normal frequency of defecation accompanied by difficult or incomplete passage of stool and/or passage of excessively hard, dry stool.
Abdominal pain.
Change in bowel pattern.
Hard, formed stool.
Hypoactive bowel sounds.
Liquid stool, with fecal impaction.
Palpable abdominal mass.
Rectal pressure.
Straining with defecation.
Vomiting.
Diarrhea
Passage of loose, unformed stools.
Abdominal pain.
Bowel urgency.
Cramping.
Hyperactive bowel sounds.
Loose liquid stools.
Greater than three stools in 24 hours.
Bowel Incontinence
Involuntary passage of stool.
Bowel urgency.
Lack of recognition and of urge to defecate.
Fecal staining.
Inability to delay defecation.
Stress Urinary Incontinence
Sudden leakage of urine with activities that increase intraabdominal pressure.
Involuntary leakage of small volume of urine.
Urge Urinary Incontinence
Involuntary passage of urine occurring soon after a strong sensation or urgency to void.
Inability to reach toilet in time to avoid urine loss.
Urinary urgency.
Involuntary loss of urine with bladder contractions.
Urinary Retention
Inability to empty bladder completely.
Bladder distension.
Dribbling of urine.
Frequent voiding.
Sensation of bladder fullness.
Small voids.
Residual urine.
Sample PES Statements
Sample PES statements for the nursing diagnoses are as follows:
Constipation related to insufficient fluid and fiber intake as evidenced by decreased stool frequency, hypoactive bowel sounds, and straining with defecation.
Diarrhea related to gastrointestinal irritation as evidenced by cramping, hyperactive bowel sounds, and greater than three liquid stools in 24 hours.
Bowel Incontinence related to generalized decline in muscle tone as evidenced by an involuntary passage of stool.
Stress Incontinence related to weak pelvic floor muscles as evidenced by leakage of a small amount of urine when laughing and jumping.
Urinary Urge Incontinence related to ineffective toileting habits as evidenced by the inability to reach the toilet in time to avoid urine loss and frequently wet underclothes.
Urinary Retention related to blockage in the urinary tract as evidenced by dribbling of urine in small amounts with frequent voiding and a reported sensation of bladder fullness.
Outcome Identification
See Table 16.9c for sample goals and outcome criteria associated with nursing diagnoses related to elimination alterations.
Table 16.9c Sample Goals and Outcome Criteria for Alterations in Elimination
Nursing Diagnosis
Overall Goal
SMART Outcomes
Constipation
The client will have a bowel movement every 1–3 days with soft, formed stool and ease of stool passage.
The client will have a bowel movement with soft, formed stool in the next 24 hours.
Diarrhea
The client will have a regular bowel elimination pattern with soft, formed stool.
The client will report relief from cramping and fewer episodes of diarrhea in the next eight hours.
Stress Incontinence
The client will have urinary continence as evidenced by no urine leakage with intra-abdominal pressure and dry underclothes and bedding.
The client will report fewer episodes of stress incontinence in their bladder log over the next month.
Urge Incontinence
The client will have urinary continence as evidenced by adequate time to reach the toilet and dry underclothes and bedding.
The client will report fewer incontinence episodes over the next month.
Urinary Retention
The client will experience improved urinary elimination as evidenced by complete emptying of the bladder and absence of urinary leakage.
The client will report a feeling of complete emptying of the bladder by next week.
Planning Interventions
Plan interventions customized to each client’s alteration, cause of the condition, and related SMART outcomes. See Table 16.9d for a summary of interventions for selected bladder and bowel alterations discussed in this chapter.
Table 16.9d Summary of Interventions for Selected Bladder and Bowel Alterations
Alteration
Interventions
Urinary Tract Infection
Administer antibiotics as prescribed.
Encourage increased fluid intake.
Provide client education regarding UTI prevention, including:
Urinate after sexual activity to flush bacteria away from the urethra.
Stay well-hydrated and urinate regularly.
Take showers instead of baths to minimize irritation and bacterial contamination of the urethra.
Minimize douching, sprays, or powders in the genital area to prevent altering the pH and normal flora of this area.
Teach females to wipe front to back to minimize contamination of the urethra with bacteria from the anus.
Urinary Incontinence
Engage with client using therapeutic communication.
Provide client education regarding bladder control training, including:
Pelvic floor, or Kegel, exercises to help prevent stress incontinence.
Timed voiding with gradual extension of time between voiding to help control urge and overflow incontinence.
Lifestyle changes such as weight loss, decreased caffeine intake, preventing constipation, avoiding heavy lifting, limiting fluid intake, or diuretic use before bedtime.
Protective products such as incontinence pads or skin protectants to manage incontinence and possible associated skin breakdown.
Urinary Retention
Monitor post-void residual.
Perform bladder scanning to determine presence of urine in bladder.
Perform urinary catheterization to empty bladder.
Administer medications as prescribed to relax prostate.
Monitor for signs of UTI due to retained urine.
Provide client education regarding bladder control training as appropriate.
Constipation
Implement bowel regimen as ordered, such as oral stool softeners, mild stimulant laxatives, progressing to stronger laxatives, rectal suppositories, or enemas.
Provide client education and encouragement regarding the importance of:
Increased oral fluids to help soften stool.
Increased dietary fiber to bulk up stool.
Increased activity to promote peristalsis.
Fecal Impaction
Administer mineral oil enemas.
Digitally remove impacted stool using a lubricated, gloved finger.
Intestinal Obstruction or Paralytic Ileus
Maintain strict NPO status.
Monitor for return of bowel sounds or change in bowel sounds and report to provider as appropriate.
Assess abdomen for distention, rigidity, pain, or worsening of symptoms and report to provider as appropriate.
Insert and/or maintain nasogastric tube as ordered.
Diarrhea
Encourage oral fluid intake.
Maintain IV hydration as ordered.
Monitor for electrolyte disturbances.
Monitor for skin breakdown and apply skin protectants as appropriate.
Administer medications to slow intestinal motility as ordered and as appropriate.
Insert and/or maintain rectal tube as ordered.
Bowel Incontinence
Engage with client using therapeutic communication.
Encourage client to maintain a food diary to determine if certain foods cause incontinence problems.
Encourage increased intake of fiber to bulk up stool.
Assist client to toilet after meals and when client feels urge to defecate.
Ensure privacy during toileting.
Encourage the use of incontinence products as appropriate.
Provide client education regarding bowel retraining, including the following topics:
Teach the body to have a bowel movement at a certain time of day through scheduling consistent routines such as drinking warm fluids, eating breakfast, or scheduling a laxative every 3 days as appropriate.
Do not ignore the urge to defecate.
Perform pelvic floor, or Kegel, exercises to regain control of anal sphincter muscle.
Implementing Interventions
Assess a hospitalized client’s bowel pattern and date of last bowel movement daily. Implement a bowel management plan as needed to achieve the goal of a bowel movement every one to three days to avoid constipation and impaction. Before administering laxatives and stool softeners, always assess the client’s recent stool characteristics and withhold medication if loose stools or diarrhea are occurring. In the same manner, when administering medications for a client with diarrhea, assess recent stool consistency and bowel pattern and withhold medication if the diarrhea is resolved or constipation is developing.
For many clients, alterations in elimination require health teaching on how to manage these conditions at home. Keep in mind that health teaching is an independent nursing intervention, so a provider order is not necessary to provide this important information.
Evaluation
Nurses evaluate the effectiveness of interventions based on the SMART outcomes established for each client and their circumstances. They determine if outcome criteria were met or if reassessment and/or revised interventions are required.
“Bristol_stool_chart.svg” by Cabot Health, Bristol Stool Chart is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 ↵
Mehta, M. (2010). Assessing the abdomen. Nursing Critical Care, 5(1), 47-48. https://doig.org/10.1097/01.CCN.0000365703.35731.b7 ↵
“Chemstrip2.jpg” by J3D3 is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 ↵
U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2024). Urinalysis. MedlinePlus. https://medlineplus.gov/urinalysis.html ↵
Queremel, M., & Jialal, I. (2023). Urinalysis. StatPearls [Internet]. ↵
“Pyuria2.JPG” by Bobjgalindo is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0 ↵
Testing.com (2020). Urinary tract infection. Testing.com. https://www.testing.com/uti-testing/ ↵
Testing.com. (2022). Urine Culture Test. Testing.com. https://www.testing.com/tests/urine-culture/ ↵
American Cancer Society. (2019). Colonoscopy. https://www.cancer.org/treatment/understanding-your-diagnosis/tests/endoscopy/colonoscopy.html ↵
“Human_intestinal_tract,_as_imaged_via_double-contrast_barium_enema.jpg” by Glitzy queen00 at English Wikipedia is in the Public Domain ↵
U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2023). Barium enema. MedlinePlus. https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/003817.htm ↵
U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2022). Abdominal CT scan. MedlinePlus. https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/003789.htm ↵
“UW_Medical_Center_PET-CT-Scan.jpg” by Clare McLean for UW Medicine is licensed under CC BY 3.0 ↵
U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2022). Abdominal CT scan. MedlinePlus. https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/003789.htm ↵
definition
